If you have zero waste out here online, please uh, join us
and turn on your video. Hello.
Welcome. Hey everyone. Welcome to the Select Committee.
I hope you're having a good day.
Yes, and you have 10 minutes with us
and the time starts now.
Oh, thanks so much for the opportunity to talk
with you about the changes proposed in this local
government systems improvement.
Bill. I'm really glad to hear
that you had a short break before I came on.
So, um, yeah, that's good to hear.
You guys do get some time in your day to breathe.
Uh, at first glance,
you might think Zero Waste Style Tower Row is an
environmental organization.
Uh, we're also business people.
We have 72 full members across the country
that run businesses that provide reuse, recycling,
composting and education services
in their local communities.
And across our network, we provide 1100 jobs, um,
meaningful secure jobs.
We recycle and compost 38,000 tons every year.
We turn over about 80 million,
which supports our local economies.
Our members include organizations like Ulta Zero Waste up in
Kadi, who focus on reuse
and recycling of construction and demolition waste.
Oranga Zero Waste is the first Maori Pacific led reuse
and recycling center up in South Auckland and Tamaki
and Wide Roll Zero Waste Supply reusable goods to hundreds
of community organizations across Auckland.
And that includes a lot of different ethnic
and migrant organizations up there.
Uh, I got my start in this sector running Wastes and Monica.
Uh, we all care about this bill
because our work across the motto is all about increasing
wellbeing of our people and our places.
Uh, we, um, we work at the heart
of our communities running businesses
and organizations that create good,
secure jobs for local people.
We provide services that help households, businesses,
and visitors to prevent and reduce waste.
And that has a really practical impact on community
development, our local economies,
and it helps us to protect our and restore our environment.
So as you would expect,
we don't support removing the four wellbeings
from the local government acts.
I'm sure you've had a lot of chat about that already today.
Uh, what I really wanna focus on is the implications
of including waste management in the list
of core activities.
Um, on the surface of it,
the change looks pretty straightforward,
but it's actually part of a radical shift
away from proactive investment by both central
and local government and waste minimization
infrastructure and services.
The bill would add waste management as a core activity,
but wouldn't include waste minimization.
Um, the bill defines waste management
as solid waste collection and disposal,
and that only covers off rubbish.
This cha, allowing this change would limit the ability
of councils and communities
to invest in alternatives to disposal.
And that's things like reuse, um, recycling, composting, um,
education and behavior change programs.
And it will lock councils
and communities into a situation
where they face steadily increasing costs to collect
and dispose of increasing volumes of solar waste over time.
But it, and which is great if you're in the rubbish
collection and disposal business,
but it's not so great if you're in, if you wanna prevent
and reduce waste and give households and businesses
and visitors practical options for reuse,
recycling and composting.
When we looked into this,
we spent quite a bit of time on it.
We couldn't find any explanation of the reasoning
behind this change.
Um, the only reference to it was a cabinet paper footnote
that said, cabinet agreed that waste management
and minimization facilities infrastructure
and waste management of core services,
but waste minimization services are not.
And that's not consistent in the, um, wording
that's proposed for the bill.
Um, or the, um, current waste minimization acts
creating like false separation like
that will really restrict
how councils can fund the activities in their WM MMPs
and it would make it really hard for them
to allocate their waste management
and minimize the budget minimization
budgets in the way that they intend.
Um, a focus on managing waste means communities will face
steadily increasing costs and liabilities over time.
And this is contrary to the bill's intent to use rate payer,
um, funds efficiently.
Embedding waste management in this way will
take us down the wrong path.
The government's intent to spend
to limit council spending on certain activities using rates,
pegs, or caps will really limit spending on anything
not considered core business.
Um, if waste minimization is excluded from this list
of core services, it's going to be really hard for councils
to justify spending to prevent, reduce and minimize waste.
There's already been so many radical changes made in the
last 18 months to how waste minimization is funded,
and we've seen the, um, the way, um,
central government spends its share
of the waste disposal levy means that changes
to the act last year mean that only a very small proportion
of the waste disposal fund waste disposal levy funds
that are collected, um,
and given to central government,
are now being allocated to minimizing waste.
A large proportion of that money is being spent on cleanups
and other environmental activities,
and this has a really perverse outcome in
that it makes governments spending on these environmental
programs totally dependent on high volume
of rubbish continuing to go into landfill so
that those waste disposal funds keep flowing in.
And the proposed changes to the way local government spends
its share of waste levy, uh,
signaled in the Waste Minimization Act amendment
consultation, we'd see local government ability to spend on,
um, waste minimization, uh, expanded out cleanups
and other environmental activities too.
And that means that council's waste minimization fund
allocations wouldn't be ring-fenced anymore,
which will make it really hard to justify spending on, um,
waste minimization and reduction when you're, um,
doing battle around the council table for priorities.
So, um, we know that waste minimization reduces risk, cost
and liabilities, which is a critical
thing that we want to see.
Um, you know, coming through with this, the intent
of this bill in 2006, the officer
of the audit auditor General looked into, um,
council waste management planning.
They found that most of their activities involve managing
waste that already existed.
Um, rather than reducing the quantity
of waste generated over time, they said,
if we don't reduce the amount of waste generated,
councils will expect to manage steady
or increasing quantities of waste.
And that puts increasing demands on systems
and budgets over time.
And what we can draw from that is
that councils will be locking themselves
and their rate payers into an unsustainable
and unaffordable trajectory.
Um, that's what we see this, um, change to the build doing.
Um, reducing demand for infrastructure
and services is critical.
Um, waste minimization should remain a priority for councils
so they can continue to invest in quality infrastructure
and services that'll reduce long-term costs, risks,
and liabilities for their communities.
Preventing and redu and,
and minimizing waste, reduces demand
for infrastructure and services.
That means that communities
and councils don't have to spend
so much on these in the future.
And this is in line with the Bill's intent
to ensure efficient spending.
The reality is that councils don't control the levers
for many of the key funding
and financing tools that could be used to minimize waste.
Councils and communities have steadily advocated for the use
of packages of tools by government
and businesses to enable effective
and efficient waste minimization and management.
Central government has the power to create a strong,
stable regulatory framework
and secure funding models waste minimization.
But we've seen successive governments choosing not to do
so over the last 20 years.
This is Lee of councils
and communities picking up the pieces
and it's given companies the freedom to put packaging
and products onto the market that impose a wide variety
of costs on communities and society.
So we think that waste minimization needs
to be a core activity for councils.
We recommend that this committee looks really carefully at
the, at the definitions
because we see a lot of problems
with the way these things are been defined
and then the relationships out into other acts.
And also, um, we really wanna see the wording clear
and consistent, but we do wanna see waste minimization given
the priority it deserves.
We know that that's what New Zealanders support
because survey after survey shows that they're really keen
to see better, um, ways to prevent
and reduce waste, um, have access to the services
that enable small business, um, visitors and households
and resident residents to be able to do that.
So yeah, happy to take any questions
that you guys might have.
Two minutes for questions. Anyone?
Alright. Yes, please. Your waters. There you go.
Um, thank you very much for your submission,
which I found really fascinating.
I was just curious about, um, council behavior
after council's behavior
after the 2007 auditor general report that you mentioned.
Was that a bit of a turning point?
And we have, we seen radical shift in terms of, um,
the capacity going into waste management
and, uh, facilities versus services. So what does that
Ratio kind of look like?
Well, there has been quite a big investment over the last
15 or 20 years by councils in, um, things like recycling,
composting behavior change
and education programs, supporting things like repair cafes
and other, um, ways of getting people
to think differently about the products that they handle.
But I think the main thing I would say is that
that report really made it very clear to everybody
that councils don't control the levers.
You know, they're not the ones who can really say, okay,
if you're putting this product onto the market,
then you need to cover the real cost
of recycling it across its life.
Um, and we, you know, it's very clear that, um,
central government hasn't stepped up.
They haven't put in place product stewardship schemes.
They haven't, you know, we've seen this government backing
down on quite a few of the things that they said they,
that would be progressed, you know, over the, through the,
the, the things that were work in progress.
So what I would say is councils are doing their best.
They don't control the levers, the, you know,
they're getting squeezed from both directions, whether
to reduce spending,
but also at the same time they've got a really high, um,
you know, expectation coming onto them from central
government in terms of an unfunded mandate
to reduce and prevent waste.
And then from their communities to provide them that serve
with services that actually makes sense
and are doing a good job.
And the cost of that is going up and up.
There's a good report by Wasteman that looks at, you know,
the, the, the steadily increasing cost to councils
of their waste budgets.
And I guess the problem that I see with this situation is
that we could end up, um, you know, with a mandate
to continue to spend on rubbish disposal,
but no, no potential for councils
to actually spend on things which would see them reduce
costs and risk over the time.
Thank you very much for that.
We've actually run out of time.
We've got, thank you for joining us
Today. Thanks so much. Yeah.
Really appreciate it. Thanks Luke.
See you next. We have environment. Southland.
Are we good? Welcome. You have 10 minutes with us.
Kira. I'm Nick Niel Hore, chairman
of Environment Southland.
I'm joined by Hay Fit General Manager
of Strategy and Regulation.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
On behalf of Environment Southland about the local
government systems improvement bill,
we broadly support the Bills goals of improving transparency
and efficiency, but we have serious concerns about several
of the proposed changes
and their unintended consequences
for regional councils like ourselves.
Firstly, we strongly opposed the proposed change
to Section 10, which removes the four wellbeings while
elevating economic growth
and development above other vital functions.
Such an approach risks deprioritizing regional council's,
critical statutory responsibilities including flood
management, catchment
and waterway protection, environmental regulation,
and biosecurity with a Iraq cap being muted,
the reprioritization
of these functions could undermine the effectiveness
of these critical safeguards, increasing the risk
in the national EN environment.
This in turn could have severe repercussions
for the South Southland's economy,
which relies heavily on the health of its ecosystems
to protect lives, properties, and the economy.
In Southland, we manage substantial flood resilience assets
worth 460 million in total, including a drainage network
of almost 1400 kilometers.
With climate change and an increasing flood risk,
it will be deeply concerning if these vital services were
compromised due to new funding or legislative restraints.
Straints additionally,
removing the cult cultural wellbeing mandate risks,
undermining the role of Man Fe, particularly at nhu,
our enduring and constructive partnership
and managing resource management issues.
We believe these values
and worldviews are essential in achieving long-term
sustainable outcomes for the South end community,
including the sustained growth of the south end economy.
N Tahu plays a integral role in many industries,
including farming and fisheries.
The commercial aspirations by ensuring the
resource management system aligns well with iwi values
and operates within harmony with, with their drug area.
A strong preference is to delete clause six of the bill
with consequence amendments to other clauses as required.
Haley.
In terms of, um, core services, the proposed definition
of core services is too narrow
and we are concerned it will force councils
to divert funding away from equally important,
but apparently non-core statutory functions.
For instance, biosecurity in Southland is at risk.
Take the case of Aria in Fjord land after 15 years
and millions invested,
we have successfully eradicated it from some areas,
but funding limits will likely make this more challenging.
In future, if biosecurity isn't recognized as a core service
of local government, critical environmental values could be
lost with a flow on severe consequence for our economy.
Our recommendation is
to remove the core services concept entirely
by deleting clause seven and 18 of the bill.
We support moves towards greater transparency
and accountability such as the proposed standardized codes
of conduct and standing orders.
However, councils must retain the ability
to adapt these documents to reflect local context.
A rigid one size fits all approach risks overlooking the
diverse needs of our communities
and may limit council's ability to respond effectively
to local priorities.
Similarly, we strongly advise caution about proposals
around benchmarking
and the regulation of council activities.
Councils operate in vastly different social economic
and geographic contexts, no more so than Southland
comparisons without nuance risk creating false equivalencies
that could undermine public trust
or stifle local innovation.
Furthermore, the culture
of competition could reduce cooperation
and breed division potentially hindering established shared
services that have consistently achieved cost efficiencies
and delivered strong outcomes,
especially in critical sectors such as Transport
Council is also concerned that specifying the scope
of activities that can be addressed in long-term plans,
annual plans and annual reports
and regulations, could significantly compromise local
democracy as democratically elected bodies
representing local residents.
And with a thorough understanding of our region,
councils should have the discretion to prioritize goals
and projects according to the specific needs
of their community and ensuring the best possible
and most cost efficient outcomes.
So to address these concerns,
we recommend deleting sub clauses 21
and Bracket two to remove the requirements for benchmarking
and the identification of core services.
We support modernizing public notice requirements
as current rules requiring newspaper
advertising are outdated and expensive for our rate payers.
However, we strongly oppose the proposal
to remove the requirement for councils
to consider whether Tik Maori acknowledge Tik Maori
knowledge may be relevant to the governance
of a council controlled organization.
This requirement presents a valuable opportunity
to integrate Tik Maori into public services
with minimal financial investment.
As for six yearly service delivery reviews,
we strongly believe that these are still valuable for us.
They give elected members visibility
and insight into how well our services are being delivered.
Therefore, we recommend deleting clause 16
and amending clause nine to ensure councils continue
to review the cost effectiveness of service delivery.
In closing and in summary, environment,
Southland supports the Bill's intent,
but key amendments are needed to ensure that environmental
and biosecurity functions aren't deprioritized,
particularly given their close connection
to economic productivity and economic growth.
Partnerships are protected
and enhanced councils retain the flexibility
and autonomy needed to serve diverse communities
and that the cost pressures from new regulations are
fairly considered.
And at Environment Southland, we are absolutely committed
to delivering good governance and public value,
but that requires legislation that reflects the full scope
of our responsibilities, not just the economic ones.
Nui, thank you so much for the opportunity
and we are very happy to answer any questions
that you may have of us.
Uh, thank you for your submissions. I go to
Als. Uh, thank you
very much for your submission and,
and thank you also for the alternative proposals
that you put on page three.
I thought that was extremely helpful and practical.
Um, I had a question on your paragraph 12
where you talk about, um, natural hazard
and mitigation, void avoidance being replaced
by civil defense emergency management.
Um, I recently had a conversation
with the disability commissioner at the human rights
commissioner get to the question, the course
that there are obligations in, in terms
of reasonable accommodation.
Um, so my question really is how you view that, um,
and whether you would view that as preventing you do doing
that work for the disabled community.
Thank you so much for the question.
That would be a concern that we would similarly share.
Um, we feel that the framing of natural hazard mitigation
and avoidance is so narrow
that it actually leaves quite a lot in question around
what the government's expectation is of us with respect
to our, um, broader functions
beyond just civil defense emergency management, what
that specifically means,
but as its degree related into more general functions
around flood hazards, um, we have, we are,
we are a pretty hazardous region
and how we might serve those communities, particularly those
with very specific needs through that function.
And so we, we don't want there to be, um, to be doubt,
but we, we do want us there to be scope
to serve our communities well.
50 seconds will last.
Uh, okay. Um, you've asked about statutory functions, um,
and um, a lot of other people have asked about that as well.
If we just put statutory functions into the core, uh,
definition of core, would that help?
It probably, it probably would help.
And I guess we we're happy with national direction,
but all the regions are different.
And so having regional flag I think's important.
I mean the, the suggestion of, um, um, benchmarking
and capping, we've got quite a bit of flood,
um, where it needs to be done.
We have to provide 40%
of it would be a tragedy if we could not, um,
actually improve our flood resilience because of budget.
Cons, constraints.
And look, if I can secondly the, um, just you,
you basically said scrap all the, all the, um, bit
of a measuring and benchmarking, et cetera.
How do we get a reasonable comparison if we don't have
something there to get a reasonable comparison?
Take all the points about nuances
and every council is different, um, between councils.
So actually transparently these councils are doing well.
These ones maybe not doing quite as well, need
to improve performance.
I think, you know, the regional sector, we,
we are pretty collaborative
and we could come up with something that
that could be measurable.
Obviously with size
and different functions it won't be perfect, but, uh,
but I think people want to see that compared with apples.
With apples. Um, no, no problem with that.
But, um, it, it is probably difficult to get a simple thing
that is, that's effective.
Um, we've seen it with taxpayers union
and it's not totally accurate for regional councils,
but we're, we're not, not opposed to that.
Transparency's paramount.
Yeah, we absolutely welcome the opportunity to work, um,
with, uh, government on what that looks like.
We have had some really productive conversations
with the Department of Internal Affairs on the recently
released benchmarking that the government did.
And I think that that was a really elegant explanation of
how it's different horses for courses sometimes
and that we, we are a fairly different region to most.
I appreciate that. Thank you. Thank you very
Much. We've gone well over
time. Have a good day. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank, Do we have the next,
Uh, I can't see the next here
Online.
I, we suspend for a weekend call the others,
but I haven't, can't see anyone else online.
Okay. Suspend. I've got One minute. Be here.